.TH POINCARE "1" "January 2025" "Stokes parameter mapping" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
poincare \- map Stokes parameters onto the Poincaré sphere
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B poincare
[\fI\,options\/\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.\" Add any additional description here
.PP
Read Stokes parameter triplets from an external file, of format as described in
this documentation, and generate MetaPost code describing the mapping of the
read trajectory or trajectories of Stokes parameters onto the Poincaré sphere.

The generated MetaPost code can in turn be compiled into, say, DVI, EPS, PDF or
SVG images to be included in TeX, LibreOffice or Word douments. MetaPost
compilation is on Linux systems typically done using the \fBmpost\fR tool,
installed together with \fBtexlive\fR or similar standard TeX distributions.
.PP
Mandatory arguments to long options are mandatory for short options too.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
Show help message and exit clean.
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-verbose\fR
Toggle verbose mode; show beautiful ASCII. Default: off.
.TP
\fB\-s\fR, \fB\-\-save_memory\fR
Toggle memory save mode; spare some RAM. Default: off.
.TP
\fB\-V\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
Show program version and exit clean.
.TP
\fB\-f\fR, \fB\-\-inputfile\fR \fI\,FILENAME\/\fR
Read input Stokes-parameters from file <name>.
The input file may contain an arbitrary number of
separate paths, and the format of the file is

    p
    <s1> <s2> <s3>       [1:st triplet, path 1]
    <s1> <s2> <s3>       [2:nd triplet, path 1]
       .  .  .
    <s1> <s2> <s3>       [M:th triplet, path 1]
    q
    p
    <s1> <s2> <s3>       [1:st triplet, path 2]
       .  .  .
    <s1> <s2> <s3>       [N:th triplet, path 2]
    q
       .  .  .                   [etc.]

Thus, each separate path should be defined by an initial 'p', after which each
following row contains a triplet of Stokes parameters. After the Stokes
parameter triplet, comments and additional information may be written
(ignored by program) until linefeed. Finally, each separate path is ended
with a 'q' on a separate line.

The only exception to the ignoring of the rest of the line as described above
is if there is a tick mark and possibly an associated label with the Stokes
triplet. In this case, the triplet will be followed by a single "t", with an
optional label specified by a following

    l <position> "<TeX-formatted label>".

This way, positions along the mapped trajectories can be easily indicated in
the input data to the Poincare program.

Thus, to summarize, each row of data in the the input file has the format

    <s1> <s2> <s3> [t [l <pos> "<TeX label>"]]

.TP
\fB\-\-paththickness\fR \fI\,THICKNESS\/\fR
Specifies the thickness in PostScript points (pt) of the path to draw.
Default: <val> = 1.0 [pt]. [1 pt == 1/72 inch]
.TP
\fB\-\-draw_hidden_dashed\fR
Toggles between drawing of hidden parts of the specified path with dashed
and solid lines. Default: off. (Solid lines)
.TP
\fB\-\-draw_paths_as_arrows\fR
Draw all specified trajectories as arrowed curves, with arrowheads at the
and point. This option is useful whenever one wish to, for example, show
on the direction of evolution of a certain trajectory, or the direction of
rotation of the Stokes vector in a circular path. With this option it is
often useful to chop up the trajectory of the original input file into
subtrajectories, so as to create multiple arrow heads in the same trajectory.
See also the \fB\-\-reverse_arrow_paths\fR option.
.TP
\fB\-\-reverse_arrow_paths\fR
Reverse the direction of all arrows drawn using the
\fB\-\-draw_paths_as_arrows\fR option. This is useful if the sampled
trajectory data are not ordered in the natural direction of trajectory
traversal.
.TP
\fB\-\-auxsource\fR \fI\,FILENAME\/\fR
Causes the auxiliary MetaPost file \fI\,FILENAME\/\fR to be included at
the end of the generated MetaPost source. Useful for including additional
comments, labels etc. in the figure.
.TP
\fB\-\-arrowthickness\fR \fI\,THICKNESS\/\fR
Analogous to the \fB\-\-paththickness\fR option, but with the difference
that this one applies to (eventually occuring) the thickness of additional
arrows to be drawn with the \fB\-\-arrow\fR option.
Default: \fI\,THICKNESS\/\fR=0.6 [pt].
.TP
\fB\-\-arrowheadangle\fR \fI\,DEGREES\/\fR
Specifies the head angle of any arrows used in the mapping of Stokes parameters
on the Poincare sphere. Notice that this does not affect the head angles of
the arrows of the coordinate axes.
Default value: 30.0 degrees. (\fI\,DEGREES\/\fR=30.0)
.TP
\fB\-b\fR, \fB\-\-bezier\fR
Toggle Bezier mode, in which Bezier interpolation is used in order to obtain
smooth paths for the input trajectory(-ies), specified with the \fB\-f\fR
option. Otherwise regular piecewise stright-line type lines are used.
Default: off.
.TP
\fB\-o\fR, \fB\-\-outputfile\fR \fI\,FILENAME\/\fR
Write output MetaPost-code [1] to file \fI\,FILENAME\/\fR.
.TP
\fB\-e\fR, \fB\-\-epsoutput\fR \fI\,FILENAME\/\fR
In addition to just generating MetaPost-code for the figure, also try to
generate a complete EPS (Encapsulated PostScript) figure, using
\fI\,FILENAME\/\fR as the base name for the job. This option relies on
system calls for TeX, MetaPost, and DVIPS, and relies on that they are
properly installed in the system environment. The EPS output and the
intermediate TeX, DVI, and and log files will from the base name be
named \fI\,FILENAME\/\fR.eps, \fI\,FILENAME\/\fR.tex, \fI\,FILENAME\/\fR.dvi,
and \fI\,FILENAME\/\fR.log, respectively.
.TP
\fB\-\-psi\fR, \fB\-\-rotatepsi\fR \fI\,DEGREES\/\fR
When mapping Poincare-sphere and corresponding coordinate-system (S_1,S_2,S_3),
first rotate angle psi == \fI\,DEGREES\/\fR around the 'z'-axis (S_3).
Default: -40.0 degrees (\fI\,DEGREES\/\fR=-40.0)
.TP
\fB\-\-phi\fR, \fB\-\-rotatephi\fR \fI\,DEGREES\/\fR
When mapping Poincare-sphere and corresponding coordinate-system (S_1,S_2,S_3),
after the first rotation (psi above), rotate angle phi == \fI\,DEGREES\/\fR
around the 'y'-axis (S_2). Default: 15.0 degrees (\fI\,DEGREES\/\fR=15.0)
.TP
\fB\-\-rhodivisor\fR \fI\,VALUE\/\fR
Number of segments in radial direction of the 2D-mapped Poincare sphere.
Default: 50.
.TP
\fB\-\-phidivisor\fR \fI\,VALUE\/\fR
Number of segments in tangential direction of the 2D-mapped Poincare sphere.
Default: 80.
.TP
\fB\-\-scalefactor\fR \fI\,VALUE\/\fR
Specifies the radius of the printed Poincare sphere (Encapsulated PostScript)
in millimetres.
.TP
\fB\-\-shading\fR \fI\,W1\/\fR \fI\,W2\/\fR
Specifies the minimum (\fI\,W1\/\fR) and maximum (\fI\,W2\/\fR) whiteness
values of the Poincare sphere to draw (using the Phong shading algorithm).
Here:
        \fI\,Wx\/\fR == 0.0  corresponds to 'white'
        \fI\,Wx\/\fR == 1.0  corresponds to 'white'

Default values:  \fI\,W1\/\fR == 0.65,  \fI\,W2\/\fR == 0.99
.TP
\fB\-\-hiddengraytone\fR \fI\,W\/\fR
Specifies the whiteness \fI\,W\/\fR to be used in drawing trajectory parts
that are hidden behind the Poincare sphere.
        \fI\,W\/\fR == 0.0  corresponds to black,
        \fI\,W\/\fR == 1.0  corresponds to white.
.TP
\fB\-\-axislength\fR \fI\,V\/\fR
Specifies the lengths of negative and positive parts of the coordinate axes,
on the form \fI\,V\/\fR = \fI\,XMIN\/\fR \fI\,XMAX\/\fR \fI\,YMIN\/\fR
\fI\,YMAX\/\fR \fI\,ZMIN\/\fR \fI\,ZMAX\/\fR with 'x' as the s1-axis,
'y' as the s2-axis, and 'z' as the s3-axis. All values are taken relative
to the radius of the Poincare sphere; thus a value of  \fI\,V\/\fR=1.0
correspond to the radius, while  \fI\,V\/\fR=1.5 correspond to an axis
length such that 50 percent of the axis is showed outside the Poincare
sphere.

Default:
        \fI\,XMIN\/\fR = \fI\,YMIN\/\fR = \fI\,ZMIN\/\fR = 0.3 (30 %)
        \fI\,XMAX\/\fR = \fI\,YMAX\/\fR = \fI\,ZMAX\/\fR = 1.5 (150 %)

.TP
\fB\-\-axislabels\fR \fI\,S\/\fR
Specifies the labels of the coordinate axes, on the form \fI\,S\/\fR =
\fI\,S1\/\fR \fI\,P1\/\fR \fI\,S2\/\fR \fI\,P2\/\fR \fI\,S3\/\fR \fI\,P3\/\fR,
where \fI\,S1\/\fR, \fI\,S2\/\fR, and \fI\,S3\/\fR are strings to use for
the s1-, s2-, and s3-labels, respectively, and where the strings \fI\,P1\/\fR,
\fI\,P2\/\fR, and \fI\,P3\/\fR determine the position of respective label,
relative the end point of the arrow of respective axis. The label position
is determined by the following syntax:

        \fIlft\fR    \fILeft\fR
        \fIrgt\fR    \fIRight\fR
        \fItop\fR    \fITop\fR
        \fIbot\fR    \fIBottom\fR
        \fIulft\fR   \fIUpper left\fR
        \fIurt\fR    \fIUpper Right\fR
        \fIllft\fR   \fILower left\fR
        \fIlrt\fR    \fILower right\fR

The label strings should be expressed in plain TeX [2] mathmode syntax.
Default: \fI\,S1\/\fR = $S_1$, \fI\,S2\/\fR = $S_2$, \fI\,S3\/\fR = $S_3$.

Important note:  No blank spaces are allowed in the label strings.

.TP
\fB\-\-draw_axes_inside\fR \fI\,S\/\fR
Toggles drawing (with dashed lines) of coordinate axes inside Poincare sphere.
Default: off.
.TP
\fB\-n\fR \fI\,S\/\fR, \fB\-\-normalize\fR \fI\,S\/\fR
Instead of making a trajectory plot of the parameters (s1,s2,s3), contained
in the file specified by the \fB\-f\fR option, instead use the normalized
parameter (s1/s0,s2/s0,s3/s0), which for completely polarized light corresponds
to a trajectory mapped directly on the Poincare sphere, without any deviations
fromthe spheres surface. This option is particularly useful when only the
state of polarization (and not the intensity) of the light is of interest
(as is most often the case when dealing with the (S_1,S_2,S_3) triplet of
Stokes parameters).
.TP
\fB\-\-arrow\fR \fI\,PA\/\fR \fI\,PB\/\fR \fI\,V\/\fR
Display an arrow, in Stokes parameter space, from point \fI\,PA\/\fR, at the
command-line specified as the triplet of floats \fI\,S1A\/\fR  \fI\,S2A\/\fR
\fI\,S3A\/\fR, to the point \fI\,PB\/\fR, similarly specified as \fI\,S1B\/\fR
\fI\,S2B\/\fR \fI\,S3B\/\fR.

This option is useful for, say, pointing out certain operation cycles in
polarization domain, or just as an easy direct way of creating paths on the
Poincare sphere without having to use external input files (that is to say,
using the \fB\-\-auxsource\fR option).

The arrow is drawn as a circular arc onto the Poincare sphere, through the
closest path between the points.  The \fB\-\-arrow\fR option may appear
repeated times,for producing multiple arrows. Currently there is a limit
of 24 arrows in one single Poincare map (which should do for most people).
The last argument \fI\,V\/\fR is a pair of float values which determines
the style of the drawn arrow. The pair \fI\,V\/\fR should be specified as
\fI\,V1\/\fR \fI\,V2\/\fR on the command-line.

The first parameter \fI\,V1\/\fR determines the line-type of the arrow to draw.
The rules are:
        -0.5 <= \fI\,V1\/\fR < 0.5   -   Solid line
         0.5 <= \fI\,V1\/\fR < 1.5   -   Dashed line

The second parameter, \fI\,V2\/\fR, determines the blackness of the arrow to
draw, where \fI\,V2\/\fR == 0 corresponds to white and \fI\,V2\/\fR == 1 to
black.
.SH SUFFIX CONVENTIONS OF THE FILES
        \fI.mp\fR    - MetaPost source code (ASCII) [1]
        \fI.tex\fR   - TeX source code (ASCII) [2]
        \fI.dvi\fR   - Device independent output file from TeX [2]
        \fI.ps\fR    - PostScript [3]
        \fI.eps\fR   - Encapsulated PostScript [3]
.SH REFERENCES
[1] For information on the MetaPost program for typesetting figures,
    see for example John Hobbys page, at
    http://cm.bell-labs.com/who/hobby/MetaPost.html.

[2] For information on the TeX typesetting system, as well as
    references to the dvips program, see for example the homepage
    of the TeX Users Group (TUG), at http://www.tug.org.

[3] For information on the PostScript programming language, see for
    example the homepage of Adobe Systems Inc., at
    http://www.adobe.com/products/postscript/main.html,
    or 'PostScript Language - Tutorial and Cookbook' (Addison-Wesley,
    Reading, Massachusetts, 1985), ISBN 0-201-10179-3.
.SS "Exit status:"
.TP
0
if OK,
.TP
1
otherwise.
.SH AUTHOR
Written by Fredrik Jonsson 1997-2025.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2025 Fredrik Jonsson, under GNU GPLv3
<https://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>.
.br
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
\fBmpost\fP(1), \fBtex\fP(1), \fBdvips\fP(1)
.PP
.br
Full documentation <https://github.com/hp35/poincare>
